chore: add phase-2 bitcoin staking documentation (#74)
babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts: README.md

### Canary version

A canary version is a pre-release version from `dev` branch.
Make sure all changes are added and committed before running the command below:

```console
npm run version:canary
```

## Usage

> **Note**: This documentation describes an abstraction layer designed to simplify two main processes:
> 1. Creating Bitcoin staking delegations
> 2. Constructing data in the format required by the Babylon chain
>

> > While this abstraction layer makes the process more straightforward, it comes with certain constraints:

Reviewer: Why do we list the below here? The reader does not have any context when they reach this point. Better to list it when we describe the abstraction methods. For example, "This method X makes the change address be the same as the staker address. If you do not want to do that, you have to use lower level method Y".

> - Change address must be the same as the staker address
> - Transaction signing order is fixed
> - Limited customization options for transaction construction
> - Predefined fee calculation formulas
>
> These constraints help maintain security and reduce complexity for most use cases. However, if you need:
> - More flexibility in transaction construction
> - Custom change address management
> - Fine-grained control over signing order
> - Advanced transaction options
>
> Please refer to the [advanced usage documentation](docs/advanced-btc-tx.md) for lower-level implementation details.

This library follow the concepts of **pre-staking and post-staking registration flow**
based on this [documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/main/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md)

> ### Prerequisite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites
```

#### Staking Parameters

> The Staking Parameters correspond to the parameters of the staking contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The staking parameters define the conditions that the
Bitcoin staking script and the Bitcoin Staking transaction containing it
must satisfy.
```

and the Bitcoin transaction containing it. 

The parameter values can be retrieved from either:
- A [Babylon](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon) node
- The [backend API service](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/staking-api-service)

> We will be using the full list of staking parameters in this library, for detailed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will be using the full list of staking parameters in this library. For detailed
```

> explanation of each fields, refer to this [documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/main/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md#32-babylon-chain-btc-staking-parameters)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
explanation of the parameters, refer to the
[staking parameters specification](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/main/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md#32-babylon-chain-btc-staking-parameters).
```

Reviewer: We should link users to this document earlier as a pre-requisite to understand the process of registering stake.

#### Staker information

> The library require Staker's BTC as well as their Babylon Genesis Account 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The library requires the Bitcoin staker's Bitcoin and Babylon Genesis account
```

information to be supplied in order to create the relevant transactions.

1. **Staker's Bitcoin and Babylon Details**
```ts
const stakerInfo = {
  address: "{{ Staker BTC address }}",

>   publicKeyNoCoordHex: "{{ Staker BTC public key without coordinates in hex }}",

Reviewer: What does being without coordinates mean? We should explain this.

}

const babylonAddress = "{{ Babylon Genesis Chain bech32 Address }}"

> ```

Reviewer: Let's provide examples on how the above would look like.

> as well the staking inputs selected/created by the staker at the time of creating

Reviewer: broken sentence?

> the delegation:

Reviewer: What's a delegation? We haven't defined it. We can refer it as Bitcoin Staking transaction.

```ts
const stakerInput = {

>   finalityProviderPkNoCoordHex: "{{ The chosen finality provider public key }}",

Reviewer: Does it need a coordinate?

  stakingAmountSat: "{{ Amount of satoshis to stake }}",

>   stakingTimelock: "{{ Timelock of the staking }}"

Reviewer: What's the timelock? Need to define these fields.

}
```

> #### Providers

Reviewer: What's a provider? Should we define it?

The library requires two provider implementations to handle transaction signing:

1. **Bitcoin Provider**: Handles Bitcoin transaction and message signing
2. **Babylon Provider**: Handles Babylon transaction signing

These providers are essential for constructing valid Babylon transaction 
messages, as certain message fields depend on the output of signed Bitcoin 
transactions. The `SigningStep` enum is used throughout the signing process to:
- Identify which signing operation is being performed

> - Enable proper user interaction flows (e.g., showing relevant prompts)

Reviewer: I don't understand what the above paragraph describes

```ts
export interface BtcProvider {
  // Sign a PSBT
  signPsbt(signingStep: SigningStep, psbtHex: string): Promise<string>;
  // Sign a message using the ECDSA type
  // This is optional and only required if you would like to use the 
  // `createProofOfPossession` function
  signMessage?: (
    signingStep: SigningStep, message: string, type: "ecdsa" || "bip322-simple"
  ) => Promise<string>;
}

export interface BabylonProvider {
  signTransaction: <T extends object>(
    signingStep: SigningStep,
    msg: {
      typeUrl: string;
      value: T;
    }
  ) => Promise<Uint8Array>
}
```

### Post-Staking Registration

This refers to registration of an already existing BTC staking transaction into Babylon

> chain network. For more details, refer to [documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/main/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md#21-post-staking-registration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
chain network.
For more details, refer to the
[Babylon node documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/main/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md#21-post-staking-registration).
```

Code references should be to the version that this library is depending on.

> **Note**: This method does not create Bitcoin transactions that are ready to be sent to 
> the Bitcoin network. Instead, it creates Babylon transactions that contain the
> unsigned and partially signed Bitcoin transactions together with already 

> > onchain staking transaction required for delegation registration.

Reviewer: What transactions are created? Which are signed and which are not? Does the user need to send anything to bitcoin?

I don't understand what information this paragraph communicates

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

const { 
  signedBabylonTx
} = await manager.postStakeRegistrationBabylonTransaction(
  stakerInfo,
  stakingTx,
  stakingHeight,
  stakingInput,
  inclusionProof,
  bech32Address,
);
```

### Pre-Staking Registration

> The Pre-staking registration flow is for stakers who seek verification from the Babylon chain before submitting their BTC staking transaction to the Bitcoin ledger. For more details, refer to [documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/main/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md#22-pre-staking-registration)

Reviewer: wrap to 80 chars

> **Note**: This method does not create Bitcoin transactions that are ready to be sent to 
> the Bitcoin network. Instead, it creates Babylon transactions that contain the
> unsigned and partially signed Bitcoin transactions required for delegation 

> > registration.

Reviewer: Same

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

const { 
  signedBabylonTx
} = await manager.preStakeRegistrationBabylonTransaction(
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  babylonBtcTipHeight,
  inputUTXOs,
  feeRate,
  bech32Address,
);
```

### Staking Transaction

> This step signs the previously created (but unsigned) staking transaction, 

Reviewer: Bitcoin staking?

making it ready for submission to the Bitcoin network. The hash of the signed 
staking transaction must match the staking transaction hash contained within 

> the pre-staking registration Babylon transaction.

Reviewer: What about post-staking registration?

The unsigned staking transaction can be retrieved from either the Babylon
chain or the backend API.

If you prefer to create a new Bitcoin staking transaction without first interacting with the

> Babylon chain, please refer to the [advanced usage documentation](docs/advanced-btc-tx.md).

Reviewer: Why would the user wants to do it?

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

const signedBtcStakingTx = await manager.createSignedBtcStakingTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  unsignedStakingTx,
  inputUTXOs,
  stakingParamsVersion
})
```
### Unbonding Transaction

> This step signs the previously created (but unsigned) unbonding transaction and 

Reviewer: Why unsigned? There are covenant signatures.

combines it with the signatures from covenants to create a properly signed 
unbonding transaction that is ready to be sent to the Bitcoin network to unbond 
a staking transaction.

The unsigned unbonding and staking transactions, as well as the covenant 
committee signatures, can be retrieved from either the Babylon Genesis Chain or 

> backend API.

Reviewer: We discuss about the API here but we do not give any information about it. We should either clearly document what's available from the API and what we refer to by "the backend API" or remove references to it and focus on interaction with the Babylon Genesis chain.

Further, we do not provide any details (or references) on how things can be retrieved from the Babylon Genesis chain.

- Timelock expiry withdrawal requires the staking transaction
- Slashed stake withdrawal requires the slashing transaction

These transactions can be retrieved from either the Babylon Genesis Chain or the Backend API.

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

// 1. Withdraw from early unbonding (when unbonding period has passed)
const signedWithdrawEarlyUnbondedTx = await manager.createSignedBtcWithdrawEarlyUnbondedTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  stakingParamsVersion,
  unbondingTx,
  feeRate
})

// 2. Withdraw from expired timelock (when staking period has naturally ended)
const signedWithdrawTimelockExpiredTx = await manager.createSignedBtcWithdrawStakingExpiredTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  stakingParamsVersion,
  stakingTx,
  feeRate
})

// 3. Withdraw from slashed delegation (after timelock expiry)
const signedWithdrawSlashedTx = await manager.createSignedBtcWithdrawSlashingTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  stakingParamsVersion,
  slashingTx,
  feeRate
})
```

> 

Reviewer: The document does not detail that the user is creating/signing other transactions apart from staking (e.g. slashing) and what their signature means. Also what about PoP?

Reviewer: All of those (including the pop) require the caller of the library to invoke a signer for them. They should know what each signature they need to add and what it means

#### Fee Calculation

> The fee calculation in the @babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts library is based on 

Reviewer: Weird that we're tagging the library here

### Canary version

A canary version is a pre-release version from `dev` branch.
Make sure all changes are added and committed before running the command below:

```console
npm run version:canary
```

## Usage

This library follow the concepts of **pre-staking and post-staking registration flow**
based on this [documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/release/v1.x/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md)

### Prerequisites

#### Staking Parameters

The staking parameters define the conditions that the  
Bitcoin staking script and the Bitcoin Staking transaction containing it
must satisfy.  

The parameter values can be retrieved from [Network Parameters](#2-network-parameters).

We will be using the full list of staking parameters in this library. For detailed
explanation of the parameters, refer to the [documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/release/v1.x/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md#32-babylon-chain-btc-staking-parameters)

#### Staker information

The library requires the Bitcoin staker's Bitcoin and Babylon Genesis account  

> information to be supplied in order to create the relevant transactions.

Reviewer: There are 6-7 different types of transactions that this library generates and we don't list them anywhere. "relevant transactions" does not give me an explanation and instead opens up more questions. If the answer is read the code, why do we write the docs at all.

  stakingTimelock: number
}
```

#### Providers

The library requires two provider implementations to handle transaction signing:

1. **Bitcoin Provider**: Handles Bitcoin transaction and message signing
2. **Babylon Provider**: Handles Babylon transaction signing

```ts
export interface BtcProvider {
  // Sign a PSBT
  signPsbt(signingStep: SigningStep, psbtHex: string): Promise<string>;
  // Sign a message using the ECDSA type
  // This is optional and only required if you would like to use the 
  // `createProofOfPossession` function
  signMessage?: (
    signingStep: SigningStep, message: string, type: "ecdsa" || "bip322-simple"
  ) => Promise<string>;
}

export interface BabylonProvider {
  signTransaction: <T extends object>(
    signingStep: SigningStep,
    msg: {
      typeUrl: string;
      value: T;
    }
  ) => Promise<Uint8Array>
}
```

### Post-Staking Registration

This refers to registration of an already existing BTC staking transaction into 
Babylon chain network. 
For more details, refer to the [Babylon node documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/release/v1.x/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md#21-post-staking-registration).

> > **Note**: This method focuses on creating Babylon chain transactions, 

Reviewer: Which method? The post-staking registration protocol, the code method that is code included below?

> not Bitcoin transactions. Specifically:
>
> It creates Babylon transactions that contain:
>   - The existing on-chain Bitcoin staking transaction
>   - Unsigned unbonding Bitcoin transaction
>   - Signed Slashing Bitcoin transactions

> >   - Proof of possession

Reviewer: I still don't understand what we are presenting here. The flow I read is the following:

- Post staking registration refers to registering an existing staking transaction. See the docs.
- The method focuses on creating Babylon chain transactions based on existing data.
- Code dump

I don't understand what this doc wants to demonstrate to me.

Reviewer: We should have a document explaining the usage of this library and what is involved with the underlying methods. I am not suggesting we explain the entire business logic here (as we already have a document explaining it), but we should do a better job of explaining the methods. The flow I wrote in my comment (and which I read from the document) is very confusing. "Reading the code" is also not an answer, this way we don't need any docs at all.

An improved flow could be:

* Staking transactions that are already on Bitcoin, such as those from phase-1 Babylon should be submitted through the post-staking registration flow.
* This flow is explained in detail at the registering bitcoin stake spec (link to docs)
* In order to follow the post-staking registration flow, you need to utilize the `postStakingRegistration` method.
* This method gets an existing staking transaction and leads to the creation of the missing data, including slashing, ...
* An example of its usage can be found below `code listing`

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

const { 
  signedBabylonTx
} = await manager.postStakeRegistrationBabylonTransaction(
  stakerInfo,
  stakingTx,
  stakingHeight,
  stakingInput,
  inclusionProof,
  bech32Address,

> );

Reviewer: This code listing does not have any comments. What does it do and how does it refer to the previous descriptions you have provided?

```

> ### Pre-Staking Registration

Reviewer: Same comments for this flow as with the post-staking registration flow.

The Pre-staking registration flow is for stakers who seek verification from the 
Babylon chain before submitting their BTC staking transaction to the Bitcoin 
ledger. For more details, refer to [documentation](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/babylon/blob/release/v1.x/docs/register-bitcoin-stake.md#22-pre-staking-registration)

> **Note**: This method focuses on creating Babylon chain transactions, 
> not Bitcoin transactions. Specifically:
>
> It creates Babylon transactions that contain:
>   - Unsigned Staking transaction
>   - Unsigned Unbonding Bitcoin transaction
>   - Signed Slashing Bitcoin transactions
>   - Proof of possession

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

const { 
  signedBabylonTx
} = await manager.preStakeRegistrationBabylonTransaction(
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  babylonBtcTipHeight,
  inputUTXOs,
  feeRate,
  bech32Address,
);
```

### Staking Transaction

> This step signs the previously created (but unsigned) Bitcoain staking transaction, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step signs the previously created (but unsigned) Bitcoin staking transaction, 
```

making it ready for submission to the Bitcoin network. The hash of the signed 
staking transaction must match the staking transaction hash contained within 
the pre-staking registration Babylon transaction.

The unsigned staking transaction can be retrieved from either the Babylon
chain or the backend API.

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

const signedBtcStakingTx = await manager.createSignedBtcStakingTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  unsignedStakingTx,
  inputUTXOs,
  stakingParamsVersion
})
```

### Unbonding Transaction

> This step signs the previously created unbonding transaction and 

Reviewer: Are we following a sequence with this instructions (referring to the "this step")? Also, what's the previously created unbonding transaction?

combines it with the signatures from covenants to create a properly signed 
unbonding transaction that is ready to be sent to the Bitcoin network to unbond 
a staking transaction.

The unsigned unbonding and staking transactions, 
as well as the covenant committee signatures, can be retrieved from either the 
Babylon Genesis Chain or backend API using the endpoints described 

> in [Staking Transaction Details](#1-staking-transaction-details).

Reviewer: We can list their retrieval here, similar as to how I referenced the retrieval of the network parameters previously.

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

const { signedUnbondingTx } = await manager.createSignedBtcUnbondingTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  stakingParamsVersion,
  stakingTx,
  unsignedUnbondingTx,
  covenantUnbondingSignatures
})
```

> #### Withdraw

Reviewer: Yea, the repository homepage is not so huge and we can have a table of contents and so on (which it sucks having on a README).

- Slashed stake withdrawal requires the slashing transaction

The required input transaction can be queried 
via the endpoints described in [Staking Transaction Details](#1-staking-transaction-details).

```ts
import {
  BabylonBtcStakingManager,
} from "@babylonlabs-io/btc-staking-ts";

const manager = new BabylonBtcStakingManager(
  btcNetwork,
  stakingParams,
  btcProvider,
  bbnProvider,
);

// 1. Withdraw from early unbonding (when unbonding period has passed)
const signedWithdrawEarlyUnbondedTx = await manager.createSignedBtcWithdrawEarlyUnbondedTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  stakingParamsVersion,
  unbondingTx,
  feeRate
})

// 2. Withdraw from expired timelock (when staking period has naturally ended)
const signedWithdrawTimelockExpiredTx = await manager.createSignedBtcWithdrawStakingExpiredTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  stakingParamsVersion,
  stakingTx,
  feeRate
})

// 3. Withdraw from slashed Bitcoin Staking transaction (after timelock expiry)
const signedWithdrawSlashedTx = await manager.createSignedBtcWithdrawSlashingTransaction({
  stakerInfo,
  stakingInput,
  stakingParamsVersion,
  slashingTx,
  feeRate
})
```

> #### Fee Calculation

Reviewer: We could add a note about that as someone could ask.

The fee calculation in the library is based on an estimated size of the 
transaction in virtual bytes (vB). This estimation helps in calculating the 
appropriate fee to include in the transaction to ensure it is processed by the 
Bitcoin network efficiently.

The fee estimation formula used is:

```ts
numInputs * 180 + numOutputs * 34 + 10 + numInputs + 40
```

This accounts for:
- `180 vB` per input
- `34 vB` per output

> - `10 vB` fixed buffer

Reviewer: Don't mind removing this
